---
layout: post
title: "Covariance and Contravariance in Kotlin"
date: 2022-01-22 20:22:55 -0700
categories: programming
excerpt_separator: <!--ex-->
---

{% include math.html %}

In programming language theory, variance describes the relationship between subtyping of simple types and subtyping of respective complex types. For instance, variance answers the question of whether ```Array<String>``` is a subtype of ```Array<Object>``` when ```String``` is a subtype of ```Object```. In Kotlin the answer is no, because Kotlin arrays are *invariants*, in other words, ```Array``` subtyping does not corresponding with the subtyping relationship of the parameter types. On the other hand, Java arrays are *covariants*, meaning that ```String[]``` is a subtype of ```Object[]``` because ```String``` is a subtype of ```Object```. 

<!--ex-->

While covariance means simple type and the corresponding complex type maintains subtyping in same direction, contravariance means subtyping works in the opposite direction. An example of contravariance is function argument. Suppose we have that two function types. The first one is ```String``` -> ```String``` (meaning input is String and output is also String) and second one is ```Object``` -> ```String```. We can say that the second function type is a subtype of the first function type. Because if a function can take as input Object, then it can take as input String, while the reverse is not always true. In this case the function type is contravariant in its argument type.

A formal definition of covariance and contravariance is:

given type order $$\leq$$, a type construct $$I$$ is covariant if $$I(A) \leq I(B)$$ for all $$A \leq B$$.

given type order $$\leq$$, a type construct $$I$$ is contravariant if $$I(A) \leq I(B)$$ where $$A \geq B$$.

As mentioned before arrays are invariants in Kotlin, there are however ways to declare generic classes so that they become covariant or contravariant. The ```out``` modifier in the below example makes the standard library class ```List``` covariant in type ```E```.

```kotlin
interface List<out E> : Collection<E> {...}

fun test(strs: List<String>) {
    val anys: List<Any> = strs // without the out modiifer this would fail at compile time.
}
```

More specifically ```out``` ensures that the type ```E``` could only be used in out position of methods. This means the generic type parameter ```E``` is only used for retrieving content, not modifying the object. For example:

```kotlin
interface Example<out E> {
    fun consume(input: E) // compilation error
    fun produce(): E // ok
}
```

This restriction makes the generic class safe as a covariant. Kotlin ```List``` meets this requirement because it is immutable. On the other hand, Kotlin ```Array``` cannot be made an invariant because it is a modifiable collection. With array if we accept that ```Array<String>``` is subtype of ```Array<Any>```, we can run into messy scenarios like below:

```kotlin
fun mess(strs: Array<String>) {
    val Array<Any> anys = strs // if we don't have compile time error here, we will run into runtime error in the next line.
    anys[0] = 1
}
```

The immutable ```List<Any>``` class does not have this problem because it will never be modified with ```Any``` object. (Well it will not be modified at all.)

In similar spirit we can make a generic class contravariant with the modifier ```in```.

```kotlin
interface Consumer<in T> { }

fun test(consumeAny: Consumer<Any>) {
    val consumeStr: Consumer<String> = consumeAny // a consumer that can take any type can also take string type.
}
```

In the above examples we use the ```in/out``` modifiers when the class is defined. This is called declaration-site variance. It is also possible to use these modifiers outside of class definition. For instance,

```kotlin
fun getFirst(arr: Array<out Any>): Any {
    return arr[0]
}

fun test(strs: Array<String>) {
    getFirst(strs) // only works when with out modifier in first line.
}
```

This is called use-site variance. The ```out``` modifier ensures that within the scope of ```getFirst```, type ```Any``` is only used to retrieve content of ```arr```, and thus ```arr``` will not be written with ```Any``` type.